Hello and welcome to today’s lecture, on
MOS dynamic circuits. It is the first lecture
on this topic, and in two lectures, I shall
consider different aspects of dynamic circuits
that are the MOS dynamic circuits. And here
is the agenda of today’s lecture, after
a brief introduction about what we have discussed
in my earlier lectures. I shall discuss about
single-phase nMOS dynamic circuits although
these are not in wide use, but for the sake
of completeness, we have to discuss it. Then
we shall see discuss about two-phase two-phase
MOS nMOS dynamic circuits, and also we shall
discuss about two-phase clock generation technique
followed by two-phase CMOS dynamic circuits.
Then finally, I shall conclude our lecture
by discussing the advantages and limitation
of dynamic circuits.
Coming to the introduction, we have seen that
pseudo-nMOS static circuits have two disadvantages.
So, they draw static current as long as power
remains on and, because of ratioed logic,
low-level output is not strong. On the other
hand, there is no static power dissipation
in CMOS circuits, but logic function is implemented
twice.
Let me consider a very simple function say
you have to realize y is equal to x 1 plus
x 2 x 3. So, using static CMOS, what will
you do? You will realize this function you
have to take compliment of this; that means,
this will be the compliment of this is x bar
dot x 2 bar x 3 bar. So, this is your y bar.
So, the network will correspond to this this
x bar x 1 bar dot x 2 bar plus x 3 bar. So,
the circuit will be like this. So, it will
have x 1 x 1 dash and then x 2 dash x 3 dash
and these are connected to ground, and the
pMOS network will be dual of that; that means,
here you will have these are parallel. So,
they will be in series. So, x 1 dash and x
2 dash x 3 dash. And you will take the output
from here, but if you realize the is the static
CMOS and if you realize by using pseudo-nMOS
then you do not require. So, many pMOS transistors
you require only one pMOS transistor and then
the n MOS network part is identical x 1 dash
and you will have x 2 dash x 3 dash.
So, we if let us compare the advantages and
disadvantages which we have discussed in detail
in the last two lectures. So, static CMOS
circuits as we can see same functionality
is implemented twice in the pMOS network and
the nMOS network. So, it requires large area
and here you can say smaller area and, because
of large area and next stage we will drive
both to a p MOS transistor and n MOS transistor,
because of that the capacitance is large.
So, delay is long longer delay long delay
primary primarily, because of larger area
and you have to drive two transistors simultaneously
and also; however, the main advantage of this
is the power dissipation is there is no static
power dissipation. So, no static power dissipation.
On the other hand is in case of pseudo small
nMOS circuit it has occupies smaller area
smaller small delay smaller delay, but there
is static power dissipation static power dissipation
is there. And it has been found that the pseudo-nMOS
circuits can be 5 times faster than that of
static CMOS circuits. So, as I mention in
my last lecture, we have to combine the advantages
of both pseudo-nMOS and static CMOS and we
have seen, because of extra area and extra
number of transistors the load capacitance
of on gates of static CMOS circuits is considerably
higher.
So, speeds of operation of static CMOS and
pseudo-nMOS circuits are not fairly comparable
as I mention that pseudo-n MOS circuits are
faster, because the of course, the static
CMOS has twice the available current drive,
but static CMOS has got twice the capacitance
of nMOS. So, although current drive is larger
and, but because of larger capacitance delay
is longer. So, whenever you have choice between
pseudo-nMOS and static CMOS on what basis
you will select one from the other if low
power is of importance than you will go for
your static CMOS. On the other hand higher
speed is of requirement then you will go for
pseudo-nMOS. Now what we are interested in
we would like to combine the advantages of
both of them, and that is why as I mentioned
in my last lecture.
We shall be going for dynamic c MOS; that
means, the advantage of low power of static
CMOS circuits and smaller chip area of n MOS
circuits or pseudo-n MOS circuits they are
same are combined in dynamic circuits leading
to circuits of smaller area lower and lower
power dissipation; that means, you are achieving
both. And also as I mentioned MOS dynamic
circuits are also faster in speed. And in
the static combinational circuits the capacitance
is regard as a parameter responsible for poor
performance of the circuit and therefore,
considered as an undesirable circuit element.
We have seen that while discussing static
CMOS circuit that delay is large, because
of larger capacitance. So, the capacitance
larger capacitances or presence of capacitances
is to be a menace, because of capacitance
there is delay and delay is longer if the
capacitance is larger.
Now, the question arises can the capacitance
I am talking about the parasitic capacitances
that is present in the circuit, can be used
fruitfully can be used can it be used for
good cause. So, far it is associated with
with delay of a circuit, but is there any
way by which the capacitances can be utilized
to achieve functionality of the circuit which
is superior in performance. In fact, that
is where the dynamic CMOS comes in in dynamic
CMOS the capacitator which is present within
the MOS circuits we have seen that the that
get to substrate or get to channel capacitance.
That capacitance is of very good quality,
because of good quality silicon dioxide layer
that is created thin oxide layer that is created
and that capacitance we shall exploit or utilize
how.
We know that a capacitor can be used to store
charge. So, since a capacitor can be used
to store charge can we develop circuit for
the capacitor intrinsic capacitor should be
used to store charge and that will be used
for implementing circuit operation. And in
fact, we shall see that dynamic circuits exactly
does that dynamic MOS circuits are realized
by using parasitic capacitors to store information.
This is also done in a in a memory elements
as you know dynamic ram that is used in almost
all systems, they are also these the capacitors
are utilized to store information, but here
we are talking about realizing combinational
circuit, by storing information in those parasitic
capacitors.
Question naturally arises are they free from
any disadvantages; obviously, in this world
nothing is one sided we shall as we shall
see, it will be dynamic CMOS circuits have
many advantages there will be many limitations
as well. So, our objective will be to design
circuits which will overcome the limitations
and utilize the good features.
So, let us proceed to discuss about dynamic
circuits to start with we shall discuss about
single-phase dynamic circuits although single-phase
dynamic circuits are not not very common,
but for the sake of completeness and for pedagogical
purposes. I shall start our discussion we
shall start our discussions about single-phase
dynamic circuits. One very important point
to be noticed at the outset that a dynamic
circuit will require some clock. So, far we
have seen that either nMOS or pseudo-nMOS
or static CMOS circuits do not require any
clock for their operation. So, clock was not
present particularly when we are realizing
combinational circuit, but as we shall see
dynamic circuits will always require some
clock.
So, if an in case of your single-phase
dynamic MOS circuit you will require some
clock. What do you really mean, by clock or
how do you characterize a clock. You will
be encountering a clock in any digital circuits
how do you characterize it you will see that
clock is essentially, a train of pulses like
this
one important feature is the or parameter
is the time period t. So, time period is one
parameter time period T or it there is another
parameter associated with time period that
is your frequency frequency is equal to 1
by T. So, a clock is characterized by by its
clock frequency. Now, in addition to that
within each cycle. So, this time period is
consider a single cycle and this is repeated
uh repeated continuously. So, if you look
at one particular time period you see that
there are two states associated with it one
is your high, and another is low so; that
means, there are two states what are the two
states high and low.
So, these are the two important states which
are used to activate circuits. And whenever
it is associated with these voltage levels
high voltage level and and low voltage level
we call it level sensitive; that means, the
circuit is level sensitive whenever it is
a change occurs whenever the circuit is high
level or low level depending on that the operation
changes. Another characteristic parameter
is also there you know there is you can see
each period has got two transitions low to
high and high to low. And these are called
edge sensitive. They are circuits which are
sensitive to edge; that means, here low to
high and high to low. So, there are two edges
in each period. So, the events can occur or
can be initiated either by changing level
or by changing edges. So, for as the MOS dynamic
circuits are concern as we shall see these
are level sensitive; that means, based on
level the operation of the circuit changes.
Let us draw a very simple single-phase dynamic
MOS inverter. How do you realize an inverter,
actually you realize you require two transistors
connected in this phone, and here you apply
a clock say this clock in simple form we usually
write is c l clock clock is applied and here
we apply Vdd then we have the traditional
pull down transistor present here, this is
your pull down transistor and we apply an
input here, and we take the output not from
here, but from this point.
So, here is the output point. So, V out and
of course, it will have some associated capacitance
as you know, because it is feeding to a next
stage and which may be a MOS transistor. So,
it is it is going to the next stage. How it
works based on the single-phase clock you
have applied a clock here, and you have applied
input here, and you are taking the output
from here. How it works when this clock is
high these transistors q 1 and q 2 both are
on. So, when the clock is high both the transistors
run, and an as a consequence what will happen
what get at the output.
Whenever clock is high and input let us assume
there are two conditions your V in is equal
to 0 volt. Whenever V in is equal to 0 this
transistor is off, as a consequence what will
happen this capacitor this load capacitor
c l will charge to Vdd through these two transistors
and you have applied a clock here. So, these
two transistors will remain on. Of course
here you will get a voltage which is equal
to Vdd minus V t not Vdd, because you know
the transistor will go off as the voltage
goes above Vdd minus V t V t is the threshold
voltage of the n MOS transistor. So, you are
getting a high level voltage which is Vdd
minus V t. Now what about the case now if
you whenever the clock is going down; that
means, whenever it is in the low level then
what happens, then what happens the voltage
which is the capacitor which is charged to
Vdd minus V t that remains there.
That remains that is available here which
we will feed to the next stage; that means,
next stage we utilize this logic level; that
means, it is assumed that output is now Vdd
minus V t; that means, V out is equal to Vdd
minus V t which is consider to be high because
input is low. Now, let us consider the situation
when V in is equal to say 5 volt or Vdd then
what will happen whenever it is Vdd. Then
you can see these transistors are on this
transistor is also non on what will be the
voltage here, voltage will be dependent on
the ratio of the w y l of this transistor
and w y l of this transistor. So, the behavior
is identical to that of you know static n
MOS circuits. So, we get a V out which is
equal to V low of course, this is not zero
which will be dependent on the ratio of the
l by w ratio of these transistor and that
is why we can say that this is a this is a
this is ratioed logic.
Now, what is the gain that we have achieved
in this case, gain is that what you can do
you can make this period; that means, high
level very small. I mean, this period can
be small this this I mean high level small
and low level longer, by that what will what
will you achieve you will achieve that power
dissipation will occur; that means, this power
dissipation can occur only when this clock
is high. Earlier respective of the presence
of clock as long as output was low, there
was power dissipation in static CMOS a static
n MOS circuits, but in this particular case
only when the output is high. I mean, clock
is high and the output is low then there is
static power dissipation. So, the static power
dissipation is reduced to a great extent,
but there is static power dissipation and
it is ratioed logic, but the static power
dissipation is much lower compared to your
static nMOS circuits or pseudo-nMOS circuits;
however, you do not get good quality high
level and good quality low level both the
levels are you know are weak not strong high
or strong low.
So, these circuits are not very popular, because
of these limitations and although for this
say sake of completeness we are discussing
it. And In fact, not only inverter you can
realized NAND gate as you can see only requirement
is that you will require additional transistors
in the pMOS nMOS network pull down network.
So, to input NAND gate we will require two
transistors to neither input nor gate we will
require two transistors in this way the number
of transistors that is required is equal to
n plus 2. So, n number of transistors for
the n inputs, and two transistors are required
these two transistors q 1 and q 2. So, these
two additional transistors are required apart
from n transistors where primary inputs are
applied. So, you see the number of transistors
is reduced. So, these circuits will be faster
than static cMOS; however, we have discussed
various limitations of this.
As I mentioned circuits realized using single-phase
clock scheme, clocking scheme has the disadvantage
that the output voltage level is dependent
on the inverter ratio. And the number of transistors
in the current part to ground moreover. The
circuit dissipates power when the output is
low and the clock is high as I mention and
as current flows only when the clock is high
the power consumption is reduced and it depends
on the duty cycle ratio of the high high time
to the time period as I mentioned here. So,
this is the time period T and this is let
us assume this is the this is T 1. So, power
dissipation will be dependent on the ratio
of T 1 by T and if T 1 is small compared to
T 1 by T then power dissipation will be smaller.
Another problem arising out of single-phase
clocked logic is known as clock skew problem
for the timing we are not discussing clock
skew problem later on we shall discuss about
it in more detail, and let us now switch to
two-phase dynamic circuits.
Now, before we discuss about two-phase dynamic
circuits two-phase. What do you really mean
by two-phase, before we come to the dynamic
circuits let us discuss about what do you
really mean by two-phase. In two-phase you
will find that there are two clocks not one.
So; that means, you will be having a clock
phi one another clock phi two. So, and they
will have some this kind of relationship phi
1 this is phi 1 and phi 2 will be like this
they are called non overlapping. By non overlapping
we mean, they are never simultaneously on;
that means, phi one bar phi 2 is always 0
as you can see; that means, when phi 1 is
1 phi 2 is 0 and when phi 2 is 1 phi 1 is
0. So, what are the different states it can
have of course, it will have the time period
and frequency like single-phase, but in addition
to that what are the other features of a two-phase
dynamic two-phase clock number one it has
got three states.
Normally whenever you have got two clocks
you are supposed to get four states 0 0 1
1 1 0 and 0 1, but here you can see you cannot
really have the state when both of them are
one; that means, here you will have 1 and
0; that means, phi 1 is 1 phi 2 is 0. You
can have phi 2 1 sorry phi 2 0 phi 1 phi phi
1 0 phi 2 1, you can have both of them 0 as
well for the during this the period both of
them 0, but in this case you will never get
1 1; that means, this is not allowed in dynamic
in two-phase clock, and that is the reason
why it is called two-phase clock.
So, two-phase clock is associated with three
states, it is characterize by three states
and a and this can be used to realize two-phase
dynamic circuits. Question naturally arises
how do you realize two-phase clock, because
how do you ensure that both of them will never
be 1. So, you will require some circuit special
type of circuit which can be used to realize
a dynamic to realize two-phase clock. Let
me draw a very simple diagram which can be
used to realize two-phase clock. You will
require
two NAND gates and several several inverters
and this is connected to this point and this
is connected to this point.
So, here if you apply clock here you will
get phi 1 and here you will get phi 2 let
me briefly explain the operation of this circuit.
Let us assume this is the clock this is the
clock and with respect to with the help of
this clock we have generated phi 1 and phi
2 which are non overlapping in nature. And
how they are becoming non overlapping and
what will be the gap between this time and
this time; that means, when it is going low
it is going high or whenever it is going high
and this one is going low, these durations
these durations are important. So, they should
be separated by some gap called band gap.
And let us see how it really happens lets
such initially let’s say here we have assumed
that the clock is 0. So, whenever this is
0 what will be the output here, for a NAND
gate as you know respective of the number
of inputs if any one of the input is 0 output
will be 1.
So, since this is 0 this will be 1 this will
be 0 this will be 1 and this will be zero;
that means, we are getting that it phi one
is also 0 when clock is 0 phi one is also
0. What about phi 2 here this since this is
0 this is 1, and here also it is 1. So, 1
makes it 0 this is one this is 0 and this
is 1. So, as expected the phi 2 is high. So,
here it is low and here it is high. Now, at
this point it has switched from low to high.
So, as it switches from low to high that is
1. What happens whenever it switches to 0
to 1 this will switch to 1 to 0 after 1 gate
delay, and as you know for a non gate a NAND
gate whenever any one of the input is 0 output
will immediately change. So, this will change
to 0 to 1 this will change to 1 to 0, this
will change to 0 to 1, this will change to
1 to 0 after how much time say how many got
gate delays 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 after 5 gate delays
phi 2 is become phi 2 is going phi 2 is becoming
low.
So, let us assume this is the 5 gate delay
after 5 gate delay this will go low. Then
as you can see here, this is now 1 and this
is also 1 these two will make it 0 this will
make it one this will make it 0 and this will
make it 1. So, this will switch to 1, but
how after how much time after this has become
say this has become 1 and this is already
1. So, when both of them becomes one after
that one two three four; that means, here
it will be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 after 8
gate delays this will switch from 1 to 0 earlier
it was one now it will become it has become
0. So, it will become 8 gate delays. So, this
is 5 delta and here will be another 3 delta
when it will go from low to high.
And this will continue until another change
occurs here. So, whenever again it switches
from 1 to 0 I mean, 1 to 0 it is switching
now to 0. And as it switches to 0 this will
now change from 0 to 1 since this is 0 it
will become 1 again this will become 0 this
will become 1 this will become 0, but after
how much time. So, we can see as it is changing
from this input is changing from 1 to 0 here
1, 2, 3, 4 after 4 gate delays it will become
0; that means, phi 1 will become 0 from this
edge after 4 gate delays. And as it has happen
this becomes 1 this is also 1, again after
three gate delays up from that it will become
switch it will switch to 1; that means, this
will switch to 1 after 3 gate delays from
this 3 gate delays and this will continue.
So, we can see here we have got 5 gate delay
here 3 gate delay here 4 gate delay here and
this to this it is sorry not this 1, this
to this 4 gate delay and from this edge to
actually it should be here 3 delta. So, we
find that in this particular case here, there
is a gap of 3 gate delay here also there is
gap of 3 gate delay here. Similarly, for the
other case also there will be 3 gate delay;
that means, this part this one the gap between
these two edges will be 3 delta gap between
these two edges will be three delta gap between
these two edges will be 3 delta.
So, this is how you can realize a two-phase
clock with the help of few inverters two NAND
gates from a single-phase clock. You may say
say you may ask that suppose we are not satisfied
with a 3 delta band gap between the two-phase
clocks. Then what you can do you can insert
more number of inverters here, say instead
of 3 you can have 5 here then this will become
this gap will be 5 delta 5 delta 5 delta and
so on. So, depending on your requirement you
can increase the gap between the two-phase
clocks, but that non overlapping property
will be always maintained whenever you will
generate two-phase clock by using this technique.
So, much about two-phase clock. So, here we
have shown the same thing and how continuously
you will get two-phase clock phi 1 and phi
2 maintaining 3 gate delays at both edges
here also 3 get delay three get delay and
so on.
Now, let us see how we can use this two-phase
clock to realize a two-phase dynamic circuit
let us consider a two-phase dynamic nMOS inverter.
So, this will require 3 transistors; that
means, here you will apply phi 2 here, you
will apply phi 1 this is connected to ground,
this is connected to Vdd and V into input
is applied here, and you will be taking output
from here V out. And as usual to explain the
operation of the circuit we shall assume that
there is a load capacitance associated with
it. Now, let us try to explain the operation
of the circuit. The operation of the circuit
can be explained with the help of what is
known as precharged logic precharged logic.
So, when phi 2 is 1 the output and; obviously,
that time phi 1 is phi 1 phi 1 is 0, when
phi 2 is 1 phi 1 is 0 that we have that we
have ensured, both of them can never be simultaneously
1.
So, when this is the case what happens this
out this transistor is on. So, this will charge
to the output will charge to Vdd minus V t
high level output will charge to high level.
So, this is called precharged phase. So, during
the precharged phase when phi is phi 2 is
1; that means, when phi 2 is 1 the output
is charging to high level this is high. Now
whenever it switches to phi 2 to 0 and phi
1 is equal to 1 in this condition this transistor
is off, and this transistor is on. When this
is this is, so what will happen to this capacitor
this if V in depending on V that now you can
have two conditions this is this is known
as evaluation phase evaluation phase.
In this evaluation phase there are two possibilities
one possibility is that V in is equal to 0,
and another possibility is V in is equal to
Vdd. Let us consider when V in is equal to
0 when V in is equal to 0 this transistor
is off and although phi 2 is 1 this transistor
is on there is no path to dispatch this capacitor
so; that means, V out is equal to Vdd I mean
is high V out is equal to high why it is high,
because which the capacitor has is already
charged to high level during the precharged
phase. And the evaluation phase follows the
precharged phase and as a consequence the
high level is maintained during evaluation
phase and which will be used by the next stage.
So, after evaluation after the evaluation
is done a valued output is available which
will be used by the next stage.
Now, let us assume V in is equal to Vdd. When
V in is equal to Vdd both the transistors
are on and capacitor will discharge to 0 logic
level so; that means, in that case V out will
be equal to 0 or low logic level. So, here
of course, you will get strong low logic level.
So, what is the advantage of this circuit
we are able to get two possible outputs and
of course, high logic level is not very good,
but low logic level is good, because it is
not ratioed logic. Number one this two-phase
dynamic circuit is not ratioed logic. There
is no static power dissipation. So, let us
list the advantages and disadvantages.
So, maybe we can discuss about the advantages
and disadvantages very quickly before we come
to other circuits advantages it is not ratioed
logic. So, disadvantages associated with ratioed
logic is overcome no static power dissipation.
Third is faster much faster than either pseudo-n
MOS or static CMOS and number of transistors
as we have seen is equal to n plus two number
of transistors is equal to n plus 2.
So, these are the advantages of this two-phase
dynamics n MOS circuit. So, we find that it
has got very good features and that is the
reason why it is called powerless ratio less
powerless, because there is no static power
dissipation and ratio less, because it is
not rationed logic and of course, it is faster
in operation. So, these two-phase dynamic
n MOS inverter is has got very good features
and it is widely used; however, you are more
interested in u h CMOS circuits.
So, we can realize dynamic CMOS circuits by
extending the idea of static CMOS and here,
as you can see how we can do that. Whenever
we are using uh statics I mean, by dynamic
circuits by using CMOS instead of the nMOS
transistor let me redraw it again.
Instead of using dynamic CMOS inverter let
me draw inverter before we can draw the other
cycles. So, in case of dynamic inverter what
you will require you will require a pMOS transistor
as pull up a pull down transistor nMOS transistor
for inverter where you will apply input voltage,
and a nMOS transistor in the path to 0. So,
and what you can do you can apply a clock
you do not really require two-phase clock
whenever you are realizing dynamic CMOS circuit
the reason for that is you can see the same
if we apply the same signal to the pMOS and
nMOS transistor, when p this phi is 0 this
transistor is on and when phi is 1 this transistor
is on.
So, that the requirement for that that phi
1 and phi 2 should not be simultaneously on
is satisfied very easily. So, we do not really
require two-phase clock in realizing dynamic
CMOS circuit. The operation is identical to
the inverter that we have discussed two-phase
dynamic n MOS inverter here, what happens
when when phi 2 when phi is equal to 0, it
is in the precharge phase
this output charges to high logic level. And
when phi phi is equal to 1 then it is called
evaluation phase.
The output is evaluated depending on the input
this V in. So, this is how you can realize
a dynamic CMOS inverter and all the advantages
that I mention in the context of this two-phase
dynamic n MOS inverter are applicable to dynamic
CMOS inverter. It is not ratioed logic there
is no static power dissipation it is faster
number of transistor required is equal to
n plus 2 and it is also powerless and ratio
less. So, all the advantages are carried to
this dynamic CMOS inverter.
You can realize dynamic CMOS inverter I mean,
extend this concept to realize more complex
gates. Let us consider a first of all static
CMOS and we shall see real we shall consider
the realization dynamic CMOS circuits corresponding
to that. Let us assume that it is little complex
circuit. So, you have got say x 1, x 2, x
3 and then you have got x 1, x 2, x 3 connected
to down. So, this is your static CMOS circuits
we want a dynamic CMOS circuit which is which
performs the same function. What we can do
you will you may use you can see as I mentioned
earlier you are repeating two logic circuits
to realize the function we shall see we can
use only one of them to realize a dynamic
CMOS circuit
Let us see how we can realize this function
by using only the n MOS network circuit. So,
what will you do you can realize the dynamic
CMOS circuits x 1, x 2, x 3 and here you will
put one nMOS transistor and here you will
put one p MOS transistor and you will apply
clock here. So, you can see you do not have
really duplicate the logic function here you
will require only the nMOS network part which
is present here to realize the dynamic CMOS
circuit. Of course, you will require two additional
transistor that is here you will require n
plus two transistors instead of two n as you
require in static CMOS. Now is it the only
way to realize dynamic CMOS circuit, actually
you can use either the n MOS network or the
p MOS network here. The circuit that has been
realized is using the n MOS network.
What you can do you can use the same you can
realize the same circuit by using the p MOS
network. So, in that case the topology will
be like this
same network x 1, then x 2, x 3, but you will
require again two transistors one at the bottom
and another the top. So, you will apply phi
bar you will apply phi or you can apply phi
bar actually. Now, where from you will take
the output here you were taking the output
from here. So, this was your V out, but whenever
used pMOS network in that case you have to
take the output from the this point bottom;
that means, V out is from here how this circuit
operates here actually again it is based on
precharge approach, but instead of precharging
the output to high level as you do it here
you are actually predischarging the output
to low level in this particular case; that
means, whenever you are using the pMOS network
then the output is predischarged during the
precharged phase; that means, this transistor
is on you have applied phi bar. So, this transistor
will be on when this is high.
Or phi is equal to 0. So, when this is high
this transistor will be discharged during
precharged phase that is being done. So, this
is discharged to 0 and during evaluation what
will happen depending on the input combinations
input vector; that means, depending on the
values of x 1, x 2 and x 3, you can uh this
output will be charged to high level if the
input combination is such the output should
be high in that case if there’ll be a path
through this through this network during the
evaluation phase when this transistor is on
and the there will be path through this pMOS
network. So, this will in the during evaluation
phase it will charged to Vdd level.
But if the if the output is 0 then it will
remain in that pre-discharged condition, it
will not charged to V v d level. So, you can
see we have two possible alternatives whenever
we realize circuits using dynamic CMOS approach
either you can use the n MOS network or you
can use the p MOS network, but you do not
have to duplicate; that means, use this as
well as that as you do in case of static CMOS
and you may have been asking which one will
be faster and of course, the network I mean
the topology using nMOS network could be faster
with the same area, because as you know the
pMOS transistors will take uh will take longer
time, because of higher resistance and lower
mobility of the holes compared to electrons
an as a consequence for the same area the
this particular topology will be requiring
larger time it will be slower than this one.
However both are used later on we shall see
both can be combined in realizing a special
type of circuit there later on we shall discuss
about it for the time being let us restrict
to this now very quickly.
Let us have a look at the disadvantages advantages
and disadvantages. As I have already mentioned,
the number of transistors required for a circuit
with fan-in N is N plus 2 in contrast to 2N
in case of static CMOS circuits. The load
capacitance is more than 50 percent less than
static CMOS and is closer to that of nMOS
circuits as a consequence it is faster. So,
the speed of operation is faster than that
of static CMOS circuits about 4 to 5 times
faster as we have we have found that; and
there is no static power dissipation and another
important point is there is no short circuit
power dissipation, why there is no short circuit
power dissipation, because at no point of
time there is path from Vdd to ground even
when the input changes, because it is controlled
by clock and as a consequence it is since
it is controlled by clock, there will be no
path from V d to would to V d to ground at
any point of time, and as consequence there
is no short circuit power dissipation.
And later on we shall see that it has got
no glitching power dissipation why it has
got no glitching power dissipation. As you
know glitching power dissipation occurs because
of you know changes at the output within the
circuit, because of the delay of the circuit,
but here it is more or less synchronized by
clock and only one transition is possible
you know after it has been precharged only
transition that can occur is from high to
low no other transition is possible, but in
case of static CMOS circuits the particular
node can go through number of charging and
discharging before attempting the final value
and as a consequence the glitching power dissipation
is not present in dynamic CMOS circuits.
And as a consequence the dynamic CMOS circuits
have been found to be very suitable, because
of theirs higher speed of operation and lower
area. In fact, one of the very important processor
dekalpha chip you may have heard of it that
dekalpha processor was one of the fastest
processor I mean introduced long back and
there they have used about 30 percent of their
circuits using dynamic CMOS. Essentially the
critical parts of the circuits were implemented
by using dynamic CMOS circuit. So, that they
can achieve very high speed of operation any
way those are the advantages and based on
those advantages this is done, but there are
several disadvantages.
Number one is charge leakage problem, number
two is charge sharing problem and third is
clock skew problem. So, these are the three
problems associated with dynamic CMOS circuits.
And in my next lecture, I shall discuss about
these disadvantages, and also we shall discuss
about how they can be overcome. Obviously,
if we accept the disadvantages, then we cannot
realize a circuit, we have to develop technique
by which these limitations and disadvantages
can be overcome, and which we shall discuss
in my next lecture thank you.